*******
Preface
*******
Welcome to this book on how to use GNU/Linux. My interaction with computers
started in 1999 which is like 14 years ago as I think in 2013. I was lucky that
I had a great college senior Srinivasa Kotu Reddy who helped me buy my first
computer as I was going after newly lauched Apple laptops at that time. I do
not even remember its name. He said that it would be better if I buy a normal
Intel machine. So we purchased and then he installed three operating systems on
that. As you would expect Windows was there; Windows 98 version of it. Then we had Red
Hat 5.1 and some Solaris. Solaris had some problems with graphics so he quickly
removed it. Now I was lucky at that time that I had not worked on computers
earlier. Because of this I had no bias towards GNU/Linux or Windows but I soon
started liking GNU/Lnux for one reason. The repository gave me one place to
hunt for software. Whatever, I needed I could find there. For Windows it was a
major pain and licenses cough cough. I mean if I would have sold myself even
then I could not have afforded all the software which I wanted to play with. So
GNU/Linux it was and then I slowly came to know about Debian GNU/Linux for
which I used to download entire 7 cds for Sarge and 14 for Etch if I remember
the names and numbers right. Then I moved on to Ubuntu and later Mint for some
eye candy and Mate. Also, Debian stable does not have latest software all the
time.

As time went by I learned my way around with C, C++ using GCC and GDB. I could
not use Emacs well for a long long time and yet I have to become an Elisp
hacker. Then I learned Perl, Python and some Ruby etc. In 2011 I started
http://libreprogramming.org to work on free books. I have written almost one
complete one on C using C99, then started on Data Structures and Algorithms
then I though oh you need Math so started on Algebra. Then I started working on
Kunjika our own Q&A platform for libreprogramming. It is reasonably complete
but work is still going on. I get bored of things quickly so I thought why not
write this one in parallel. This idea of this book was originally given by one
of my students as I call my readers, Pavan Mistry. Then my cousin pitched in
and he too supported the idea. So here I start writing this book. This book
will never be finished. It will go on and on and on ...

Content
=======
Now the question is what do you expect to find in this book. Well, I will show
you how to use GNU/Lunux in particularly I am biased towards deb based
Linuses. I will show how to use Debian. But
distribution is not even 1% of software which comes with it. I will show best
of all that and how to use them effectively. For example, using command line,
VI, Emacs, GCC, GDB, Perl, Python, Valgrind etc for programming. Note that I
will describe tool aspects not the programming aspects. I will show how to
configure servers like Apache, Nginx, Postfix, Dovecot, Samba, OpenLDAP. I will
write also about things like OpenSSL, OpenVPN. If time permits I will add rpm
based distros also starting with Cent OS and then OpenSUSE. I will show how to
use CVS, SVN, Git etc and not only using the client side but also how to setup
servers of these version control softwares. I will try to also show you how to
use software like ffmpeg, Audacity, Kdenlive, RecordMyDesktop etc for
video/audio recording and editing. I will also try to tell something about
Groff, LaTeX, ConTeXt, Docbook like setting up the toolchain. None of this
stuff is difficult to learn. I will also show sed and awk which are classic
tools for text manipulation. I will try to teach most common shell commands
useful in day-to-day work on GNU/Linux. Most of this material is available on
internet scattered everywhere. It is time to make a garland of these beautiful
flowers.

I will use GNU manual's contents extensively to explain the topics.
The emphasis has been given on examples which one cna try on his/her own
system. The practice when done by the reader make him feel confident. This is
very imporatnt because command prompt of GNU/Linux even though is very well
documented can prove to be intimidating for a new user. This is especially true
when you do not have internet connection and you cannot search for your
problems using search engine. Therefore the books has been written in such a
matter that it should be sufficient for self-study.

Acknowledgements
================
First, I would like to thank my parents, wife and son for taking out their fair
share of time and the support which they have extended to me during my bad
times. After that I would like to pay my most sincere gratitude to my teachers
particularly H. N. Singh, Yogendra Yadav, Satyanand Satyarthi, Kumar Shailesh
and Prof. T. K. Basu. Now is the turn of people from software community. I must
thank the entire free software community for all the resources they have
developed to make computing better. However, few names I know and here they
go. Richard Stallman is the man behind start of GNU and free software
movement. For that matter I should also count the contribution of Donald Knuth
for contributing TeX long time ago before GNU was started. That was the first
major contribution to free software commuinity which still exits. I possibly
cannot write all the names because then possibly an entire chapter will be full
of those names. :-) I am using Sphinx to write this book therefore obviously
people at http://sphinx.pocoo.org deserve praise for his work on it. I used
Emacs with ReST mode for editing.
